Overview

In this project, you will make use of Python to explore data related to bike share systems for three major cities in the United States—Chicago, New York City, and Washington. You will write code to import the data and answer interesting questions about it by computing descriptive statistics. You will also write a script that takes in raw input to create an interactive experience in the terminal to present these statistics.

What Software Do I Need?

To complete this project, the following software requirements apply:

    You should have Python 3, NumPy, and pandas installed using Anaconda
    A text editor, like Sublime or Atom.
    A terminal application (Terminal on Mac and Linux or Cygwin on Windows).

Bike Share Data

Over the past decade, bicycle-sharing systems have been growing in number and popularity in cities across the world. Bicycle-sharing systems allow users to rent bicycles on a very short-term basis for a price. This allows people to borrow a bike from point A and return it at point B, though they can also return it to the same location if they'd like to just go for a ride. Regardless, each bike can serve several users per day.

Thanks to the rise in information technologies, it is easy for a user of the system to access a dock within the system to unlock or return bicycles. These technologies also provide a wealth of data that can be used to explore how these bike-sharing systems are used.

In this project, you will use data provided by Motivate, a bike share system provider for many major cities in the United States, to uncover bike share usage patterns. You will compare the system usage between three large cities: Chicago, New York City, and Washington, DC.
The Datasets

Randomly selected data for the first six months of 2017 are provided for all three cities. All three of the data files contain the same core six (6) columns:

    Start Time (e.g., 2017-01-01 00:07:57)
    End Time (e.g., 2017-01-01 00:20:53)
    Trip Duration (in seconds - e.g., 776)
    Start Station (e.g., Broadway & Barry Ave)
    End Station (e.g., Sedgwick St & North Ave)
    User Type (Subscriber or Customer)

The Chicago and New York City files also have the following two columns:

    Gender
    Birth Year


Statistics Computed

You will learn about bike share use in Chicago, New York City, and Washington by computing a variety of descriptive statistics. In this project, you'll write code to provide the following information:

#1 Popular times of travel (i.e., occurs most often in the start time)

    most common month
    most common day of week
    most common hour of day

#2 Popular stations and trip

    most common start station
    most common end station
    most common trip from start to end (i.e., most frequent combination of start station and end station)

#3 Trip duration

    total travel time
    average travel time

#4 User info

    counts of each user type
    counts of each gender (only available for NYC and Chicago)
    earliest, most recent, most common year of birth (only available for NYC and Chicago)

The Files

To answer these questions using Python, you will need to write a Python script. To help guide your work in this project, a template with helper code and comments is provided in a bikeshare.py file, and you will do your scripting in there also. You will need the three city dataset files too:

    chicago.csv
    new_york_city.csv
    washington.csv

All four of these files are zipped up in the Bikeshare file in the resource tab in the sidebar on the left side of this page. You may download and open up that zip file to do your project work on your local machine.

Some versions of this project also include a Project Workspace page in the classroom where the bikeshare.py file and the city dataset files are all included, and you can do all your work with them there.
